RAD-2017, Montenegro




     Andrey Ponomarenko*, Alfredo Pereira Jr.**, Victor
                Nunes*** and Valeriy Zaporozhan****

              * Associate Professor, Odessa National Medical University - Ukraine, E-mail: aponom@hotmail.com
      ** Adjunct Professor, State University of São Paulo (UNESP) – Botucatu, SP, Brazil; E-mail: apj@ibb.unesp.br
                                                            *** Medical Physicist, E-Mail: victor_nlfs@hotmail.com
                                                      **** Professor, Odessa National Medical University, Ukraine.
Hippocampus in color (Greg Dunn, 2011, www.gregadunn.com )
complexity of the neural tissue can be compared with world-wide internet network. We
suggest that mechanisms of the information coding and transmission in this network
are not evaluated completely:




                      RAD-2017, Montenegro
Generally-accepted mechanism:
Mechanism of the neural impulse transmission in axons




              RAD-2017, Montenegro
                                          Efferent neuronal pathway:




          Richard Guy Advan in Physiol Edu 2012;36:226-228



©2012 by American Physiological Society     RAD-2017, Montenegro
Electrical signals generated by neural cells
(by Cyril Pernet )




                     RAD-2017, Montenegro
RAD-2017, Montenegro

   Calcium Waves in Astrocytes and Hydro-Ionic
   Waves in Brain Tissue
    Calcium waves are formed inside many types of somatic cells,
    by means of a signaling pathway initiated by a ligand binding
    with metabotropic receptors at the cell’s membrane,
    activating inositol triphosphate (IP3), which prompt the
    release of previously stored calcium ions from the
    endoplasmic reticulum.
    In the astrocyte network, calcium ions reach processes (distal
    branches of the cell), and then move to other cells in the
    network. Gap junctions and hemi-channels between
    astrocytes allow the passage of ions, forming continuous
    oscillations/waves.
   The Hydro-Ionic Wave in Brain Tissue:




The calcium wave is induced by transmitter binding to metabotropic receptors located
at the astrocyte membrane, triggering a signaling pathway that prompts IP3 and to
release the ions from the endoplasmatic reticulum. The ions are directed by the
negative region of water (H3O2), propagating to other cells and also interacting with
other ions and proteins.
Visualization of Calcium Signaling in Astrocytes
From R. Douglas Fields, 2010




    Astrocytes are non-neuronal cells in the brain (glia) that do not generate
    electrical impulses but communicate by chemical signaling.
                               RAD-2017, Montenegro
Hypothesis #1: hydro-ionic waves
 -We introduce a hypothesis that both afferent and efferent
 neural pathways involve additional mechanism of signal
 transduction in form of a hydro-ionic waves in brain and
 body tissues, being induced by polypeptides (ligands) and
 protein interactions and having properties similar to musical
 patterns, namely: rhythm, meaningful frequencies and
 presumably, consonance;
 - Signals transmitted by hydro-ionic waves are not as
 strictly targeted as neural impulses;
 - Mechanisms of our feelings could also include the same
 biophysical substrate composed of the hydro-ionic waves.

                RAD-2017, Montenegro
Possible mechanisms of the hydro-ionic
waves:
Taking into consideration the complexity of interactions between ions,
water and proteins, the following four mechanisms of hydro-ionic waves
can be proposed:
a) Interaction of cations (Ca2+, Na+, K+) by means of the Coulomb forces;
b) Interactions of cations with structured water in living tissue. Aquaporin
has an internal positive wall that induces the formation of negative
exclusion zones inside the astrocyte;
c) Attraction by negative protein sites, as a guide to travel in the
cytoplasm and extracellular space; and
d) Attraction by structured water bound to positive protein sites, forming
a “combo” of cations with water and positive protein sites (e.g.,
glycoproteins). The water negative zone bound to positive protein chains
composes a “tissue avenue" for the cationic wave to move.

                   RAD-2017, Montenegro
Hydro-Ionic Waves and Feelings
According to the model published by Pereira Jr. and Furlan
(2009; 2010) and Pereira Jr. (2014, 2017), neurons execute
cognitive operations (processing of sensory signals, selective
attention, memory, locomotor control), while the hydro-ionic
wave generated by the astroglial network instantiates feelings
(all kinds of feelings - from basic sensations as hunger and
thirst to perceptual 'qualia' as the feel of color, sound, taste,
smell; also emotional feelings as joy and sadness and social
feelings as love and hate).




                 RAD-2017, Montenegro
RAD-2017, Montenegro
RAD-2017, Montenegro
Hypothesis #2: signal mimicry

 In case external physical signals (electromagnetic or
 sound signals) mimic the rhythmic and frequency
 patterns of natural (neuro)-biological signals or are
 able to generate corresponding hydro-ionic waves,
 such external signals could elicit biological, psycho-
 somatic, psychological effects resembling the effects of
 natural proteins/signaling molecules/ neuro-
 modulators.


               RAD-2017, Montenegro
Pilot Experiment: Brain Electric Stimulation with
Music
A pilot experiment was conducted to check possible effects of
transcranial electric stimulation with alternating current
which carried musical patterns. Volunteers were submitted to
four fragments of popular musical melodies. The volunteers
were requested to guess the melodies and to report possible
feelings/effects of the treatment. The source of the electrical
signals was an MP3 player connected to audio amplifier. The
electrical signals where applied to volunteers using three
metallic scalp electrodes (the negative - inside the mouth, and
two positive on the scalp targeting the auditory cortex). The
experiments demonstrated that identification of the songs
exceeded accidental level and there was a relaxing effect
experienced by volunteers.
                RAD-2017, Montenegro
Pilot Experiment: Brain Tissue Electric Stimulation
with Music




  The music output of the audio amplifier generated an electric current that
  crossed the brain tissue of the subjects (S) and the serially connected headphone
  monitored by the experimenter (E). The subject did not hear the music, but the
  musical patterns generated a relaxing effect. Legend: E1,2,3 = Electrodes and
  AF1,2 = Speakers.

                      RAD-2017, Montenegro
Hypothesis #3: Chladni-like patterns in
biological tissues


                                              Image source:
                                              https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9uEeADQ
                                              N8Jo


We suggest that specific sounds can cause formation of
Chladni-like patterns in various biological tissues. These
patterns could be formed by distribution of specific ions and
biomolecules, localization of zones of altered electrical
conductivity or density characteristics. Formation of the
patterns could influence local biophysical properties of
tissues, biological processes and signaling pathway.
                       RAD-2017, Montenegro
Hypothesis #4: sound modeling of
natural biological codes

Sounds and sound sequences that
resemble the natural biological codes
in terms of rhythm, frequency patterns
and consonance (ex.- “protein music”)
could cause biological effects



         RAD-2017, Montenegro
 We hypothesize that in case of transformation of a molecular
  biological signal into neural signal, the generated neural
  signal could possess rhythmic pattern specific to that of
  inducing bio-molecule. For example, rhythmicity of
  positively/negatively charged amino acids in a polypeptide
  signaling molecule (cytokine, hormone, etc.) could
  predetermine the rhythmic pattern of generated neural signal;
 It is possible that some sound patterns (music) could exert a
  biological effect in case its rhythmic pattern coincide with that of
  natural neuronal code for some afferent or efferent neural
  impulses;
 It follows that possible approach for modeling of sound patterns
  possessing predicted biological effect will be construction of
  musical rhythms that resemble/model the rhythmicity of
  aminoacid sequence of corresponding bio-molecules
  (polypeptides, hormones, cytokines, etc.);
 Irradiation in brain tissue the sound sensory signals generated by
  the “Protein music” may selectively regulate the activity or
  threshold levels of neurons, neuronal pathway, neural ganglion
  and nuclei.

                  RAD-2017, Montenegro
Molecular-biophysical pattern of polypeptide molecule can be very complicated   :
Specific properties of amino acids
( from http://www.geneinfinity.org/sp/sp_aaprops.html )




                               RAD-2017, Montenegro
 Based on the proposed hypothesis we created
 computer software for direct transcription of
 amino-acid sequences into musical patterns.

 The rhythm of the constructed “music” corresponds
 to sequence of charged/uncharged aminoacids in the
 model polypeptide, and

 Sound frequency (the notes) corresponds to
 properties of aminoacids in the polypeptide chain.




              RAD-2017, Montenegro
Transcription of an amino-acid sequence into
notes (software created by A.A.Ponomarenko)




            RAD-2017, Montenegro
We propose you listen to an example of the
“polypeptide music” or “Bio-music”.

(In order to preserve your ears and nerves we deleted from the natural sound
sequences some dissonant fragments).




                   RAD-2017, Montenegro
The artwork of Greg Dunn “Brain illuminated” (2016),
www.gregadunn.com illustrated by the protein music created by

method Ponomarenko et al.




                RAD-2017, Montenegro
Conclusions and suggestions:
 1) Proteins are actively engaged in the signal induction and signal
  transmission in live tissues, including neural tissue;

 2) Rhythmic and frequency patterns of the polypeptide chain (for
  example – rhythm of location of positive or negatively charged amino-
  acids in the polypeptide) can determine or modulate the informational
  meaning of the signals generated/mediated by corresponding protein;

 3) We suggest that purposefully composed electromagnetic or sound
  sequences (for example – the “Protein music”) are able to cause
  targeted biological effects in case they resemble (mimic) the rhythmic
  and frequency patterns of natural neuro-regulatory signals or
  corresponding patterns of polypeptides involved in the signaling
  pathway.

                   RAD-2017, Montenegro
Possible applications:

 We suggest that possible applications of the “Protein
 music” could include:
 - correction of personal emotional state;
 - activation of regeneration processes;
 - regulation of hormonal misbalances;
 - correction of biochemical, immunological and psycho-
 neurological reactions.




               RAD-2017, Montenegro
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT:

Authors are grateful to Alexey Ponomarenko for creation of the
original computer software for transcription of protein sequences
into musical score




                 RAD-2017, Montenegro
References
 Pereira Jr., A. & Furlan, F. A. (2009). On the role of
  synchrony for neuron-astrocyte interactions and
  perceptual conscious processing. Journal of Biological
  Physics, 35, 465–481.
 Pereira Jr, A & Furlan, F. A. (2010) Astrocytes and human
  cognition: Modeling informationintegration and
  modulation of neuronal activity. Progress in Neurobiology,
  92, 405–420.
 Pereira Jr., A. (2014). Triple-Aspect Monism: Physiological,
  mental unconscious and conscious aspects of brain activity.
  Journal of Integrative Neuroscience, 13, 201-227.
 Pereira Jr., A. (2017) Astroglial hydro-ionic waves guided by
  the extracellular matrix: An exploratory model. Journal of
  Integrative Neuroscience, 16 (1), 57-72.

                 RAD-2017, Montenegro
Thank you for attention !




      RAD-2017, Montenegro
Supplemental information:


Electrical spikes generated by neurons




                  RAD-2017, Montenegro
Supplemental information:

20 Amino acids: genetic code, structure and
properties (from https://chem.libretexts.org/LibreTexts/University_of_Kentucky




                       RAD-2017, Montenegro
