Bio Vedic Flower Remedies




Vedic Studies
                                                Tatva
Tatvas are the 100 qualities or properties of human body which have to be considered for attaining proper
health. The healer should inspect the person for all these aspects and study their interdependence to reach the
root cause of the problem. They are as follows:
Gnanendriya - 5
The organs of sense
1. The eye - the organ of sight having visible formes as its object.
2. The ear - the organ of hearing, having sound as its object.
3. The nose - the organ of smelling, having smell (odors) as its object.
4. The tongue - the organ of tasting, having flavors as its object.
5. The skin – the organ of feeling, having touch (contact) as its object.
Karmendriya - 5
The organs of actions
1. The mouth (the organ of speech)
2. The feet
3. The hands
4. The anus
5. The genitals
                                                Tatva
Chakra - 7
1. Mooladhara
2. Swadhistana
3. Manipura
4. Anahata
5. Visudhi
6. Aagna
7. Sahasrara
Tanmatras - 5
1. The light
2. The sound
3. The taste
4. The smell
5. The consciousness
Antahkarana - 4
The intellectual powers
1. Mana – the organ of thought
2. Buddhi – the organ of understanding.
3. Aham – the power of mind which leads to the accomplishment of objectives, and eventually toward identifications
   and attachments.
Antahkarana
Nadi
Naadi - 14
The fourteen main meridians or energy channels
1. Sushumana – the nerve passing through six ataras
2.Ida – the nerve beginning from the great toe of the
   right foot and passing up to the left nostril.
3.Pingala - the nerve beginning from the great toe of
   the left foot and passing up to the right nostril.
4.Gandhari – the nerve beginning at the navel and
   passing to the neck, where it assumes a sevenfold
   form, being the source of the seven musical tones
   of the human voice.
5.Hastajihva
6.Kuhu
7.Saraswathi – situated in the region of the eyes
   forming ten branches, as optical nerves.
8.Pusha
9.Sankhini– situated in the verenda.
10.Payaswini – in the region of the ears forming 120
   branches or auditory nerves
11.Varuni– beginning at the naval and reaching to
   the verenda.
12.Alambusha
13.Vishvodhara
14.Yasaswini
Dhatu
Dhatus - 7
The seven constituents of the body:
1.Rasa -The Serum
2.Rakta -The Blood
3.Mamsa- The flesh
4.Medas - The Brain and Fat
5.Hasthi - The Bone
6.Majja- The Bone marrow
7.Shukra - The Semen
Dhatu
                                      Vayu
Vayu - 10
The ten vital airs of the body
1.Praana – situated in the heart
2.Apaana - situated in the top of the head and
3.passing downwards
4.Samaana - situated in the pit of the throat
5.Vyaana – pervading the whole body
6.Udaana - situated in the navel
The 5 Upavaayus are
7.Naga– which effects the motions and speech
8.Koorma – causing horripilation
9.Krukkura- seated in the face
10.Devadattha – that which is exhaled in yawning
11. Dhananjeya – that which remains in the body after the death and escapes by splitting
Kosha - 5
There are five Kosha
1.Annamaya - The food body
2.Manomaya - The body composed of mind
3.Pranamaya - The force vitalizes and holds together the body and the mind
4.Vijnanamaya - The body composed of intellect
5.Anandamaya - The body composed of bliss
Vikara - 8
Kama, Krodh, Lobha, Moha , Mada, Matsarya, Damba and Darpa are the original Vikara
1.Kaama
2.Krodha
3.Lobha
4.Moha
5.Mada
6.Matsarya
7.Damba
8.Darpa
                       Asthamatruka

Brahmani ( Kaama or Lust and is the manifestation of creation and birth)
Vaishnavi (Moha manifest as delightful shape, symmetry organization and order)
Maheshvari (Krodha manifest as Power and strength)
Indrani (Matsarya manifest as the destruction of forces opposing cosmic law)
Kaumari (Lobha manifest as aspiration of evolving soul, guide and unending
youth),
Varahi (Mada manifest as power of assimilation and enjoyment)
Chamunda (Damba manifest as concentration, awakening and upliftment of the
mind)
Narasimhi (Darpa manifest as auspiciousness and Joy)
Dosha - 3
The three kinds of temperaments of the body. This forms the basis of ayurevedic treatment since
1.Vaata – inducing melancholy.
2.Pitta – bilious distempers.
3.Kapha – a phlegmatic temper.
Gunas - 3
The three attributes. (The 3 original Powers causing the
creation)
1.Sattva guna(Gnan Shakti)
2.Rajas guna (Kriya Shakti)
3.Tamo guna (power of ignorance and obstruction causing
 darkness)
                            PHOTOSYNTHESIS AND TRIGUNAS




                                                                                        C4 photosynthesis as Saatvika devavata:
Bacterial chemosynthesis as Thamasika devata:

                                                C3 photosynthesis as Rajasika Devata:
           Six Stages of Disease
Disease is formed way before it is diagnosed
1. Accumulation – Sanchaya
2. Provocation – Prakopa
3. Spread – Prasara
4. Localization/Desposition – Sthana Samshraya
5. Manifestation – Vyakti
6. Differentiation/Complication of Disease – Bheda
Lorem Ipsum Dolor



Subtle Body
Sukshma Sarira
The subtle body (Sukshma sarira or Sukshma sharira) in Vedantic philosophy
is composed of five Kosas or "sheaths". The subtle body is the vehicle of
consciousness with which one passes from life to life. The Liṅga Śarīra is the
vehicle of consciousness in later Samkhya, Vedanta, and Yoga, and is propelled by
past-life tendencies, or bhavas.[2] Linga can be translated as "characteristic mark"
or "impermanence" and the term Sarira as "form" or "mold".[3] Karana or
"instrument" is a synonymous term. In the Classical Samkhya system of
Isvarakrsna (ca. 4th century CE), the Lińga is the characteristic mark of the
transmigrating entity. It consists of twenty-five tattvas from eternal consciousness
down to the five organs of sense, five of activity (buddindriya or jñānendriya, and
karmendriya respectively) and the five subtle elements that are the objects of
sense (tanmatras).
Shakti- Energy
